---
...

Finance 4480 - Derivatives Markets
==================================

-   **Instructor:** Tyler J. Brough

-   **Email:** [](mailto:tyler.brough@aggiemail.usu.edu)

-   **Office:** BUS 605

-   **Course Dates:** January 12 - April 28, 2016

-   **Course Room:** [ENGR 304](https://www.usu.edu/map/index.cfm?id=32)

-   **Course Time:** TR 7:30 - 8:45 AM

-   **Course Website:** <http://broughtj.github.io/teaching/FIN4480/>

-   **Office hours:** TBD

Course Description
------------------

This course is an introduction to derivative securities, the markets in
which they trade, theoretical models for obtaining rational prices for
them, and their applications in hedging and speculation. Derivatives are
an advanced finance topic. At one time, a course in derivatives was
considered a specialized elective, but is now considered mandatory in
any finance major. Our topic is by nature an analytical one that will
require a good deal of mathematics and quantitative reasoning. However,
we will seek a balance between the theoretical presentation of the
material and a practical implementation. The skill set necessary to
effectively implement modern financial derivative pricing models is a
crucial one to have for those seeking a job in the finance industry.

Course Objectives
-----------------

-   Learn fundamental principles and theories.

    -   Learn what derivatives are and their basic vocabulary.

    -   Learn how derivatives markets operate and the institutional
        features of the markets in which they trade.

    -   Learn the principles of modern financial economic theory
        explaining how derivative securities are priced.

-   Learn to apply course materials

    -   Learn a framework for corporations, individuals, and other
        organizations to determine how and when to use derivative
        securities for hedging and speculation.

    -   Learn to implement derivative pricing models for applications in
        hedging and speculation.

-   Developing specific skills, competencies and points of view needed
    by professionals in the finance industry and in academic finance.

    -   Learn the basics of [Python](https://www.python.org/)
        programming for purposes of financial modeling.

### Python Programming

One unique objective of this course is to learn the basics of Python
programming for financial modeling. I have found that programming
financial models is an extremely helpful pedagogical tool for learning
financial theory. In addition, I have found that my past students have
benefited very much from learning some basic programming skills.

The version of Python that we will be using is the following:

-   The [Anaconda](https://store.continuum.io/cshop/anaconda/) edition
    of Python by Continuum Analytics. This will have everything that we
    will need pre-installed. Please install the version that comes with
    Python 3. It is completely free.

Python is a very good choice for a programming language for this course.
As a programming language, Python is fairly easy to learn and can be put
to productive use very quickly. Python is quickly becoming the de facto
scripting language for scientific computing, and is widely used in the
finance industry. Programming will be used as a tool to reinforce
learning about derivatives and how they are priced, it will not be the
main focus of the course. The amount of programming that you will be
required to learn is quite modest. Nevertheless, I cannot emphasize
enough how important these skills are for a student of finance to be
competitive in the labor market.

### Linux/UNIX

I also **highly** recommend that you learn a little about the UNIX
command line as well. I will be covering some basic material about UNIX
in the course, and will use if heavily myself. While I encourage this,
your grade will not depend on this material at all. But I think you will
find it a very helpful addition to your skill set.

Textbook
--------

The *required* textbook for the course is *[Options, Futures and Other
Derivatives 9th Edition](http://goo.gl/G5O2fx)* by John C. Hull.

In addition, I will follow the book *[Python Programming for the
Absolute Beginner 3rd Edition](http://goo.gl/iipcHA)*, in my
presentation of the Python programming language. This book is **not**
required, but it is **strongly suggested** for those who have never
programmed before.

While the first book doesnâ€™t have a very serious subject (simple
computer games) the programming taught is *serious* programming and it
is taught in a way that takes away some of the intimidation associated
with other beginning programming books. I highly recommend it!

Grading
-------

The grade that you will earn will be determined from your ranking in the
class based on the weighted total points accumulated on class
preparation and participation, a class project, as well as on exams.
There is no predetermined percentage of the class that will earn an A or
that will fail. If you all do excellent work you will all earn
exceptional grades. The weights given to each part of the class are as
follows:

### Class Preparation & Participation (20%)

This portion of your grade will be determined by your preparation for
class lectures, your participation in class discussions and the
completion of homework assignments. Homework assignments will be given
approximately every Thursday and will be due a week later. I will drop
your lowest assignment and replace it with the average of the others if
you hand all assignments in with full effort. Participation in class is
crucial!

### Class Projects (40%)

This portion of your grade will be determined by a class project. The
project will consist of a computational modeling exercise. You can work
in teams of two. Potential topics will be discussed in class, but here
are some suggestions:

-   Monte Carlo pricing of an exotic option such as Asian option

-   Monte Carlo estimation of hedging strategies

-   Monte Carlo pricing of a swaption

-   Monte Carlo pricing of an option subject to stochastic volatility

-   Monte Carlo pricing of an option subject to price jumps

-   Monte Carlo evaluation of the Stutzer pricing methodology

### Exams (40%)

This portion of your grade will be determined by your performance on the
midterm and final exams. I will calculate your grade two ways:

-   The total of your two exam scores

-   Drop the midterm exam and place all of the weight on the final

Your grade will be determined by which ever method gives you the highest
total points.

Format and Attendance {#format}
---------------------

This course is designed to be as interactive and hands-on during our
face-to-face class time as possible. As much as possible I will seek to
present the dense textbook material in online video lectures. You will
watch these on your own time out of class. We will use class time to dig
deeper into the material, solve problems, and go over homework problems.
This puts a strong burden on each student to come to course prepared to
participate in class.

To make this work in practice class attendance will be mandatory. To
enforce this I will collect a list of questions from each of you at the
beginning of class. Often I will use those questions to decide upon how
we will spend class time.

Topics (Subject to Change)
--------------------------

Please see the course website and the course Google Drive folder for a
spreadsheet with and updated schedule.

Important Dates:

-   **Feb 16** - Monday Schedule

-   **Mar 7 - 11** - Spring Break

-   **Apr 28** - Last Day of Classes

-   **Apr 3** - Final Exam
